# Airbnb Analysis for Real Estate Investors Amy & Addy
## Introduction:
The goal of this project was to provide our clients and prospective real estate investor sisters Amy and Addy with a feasibility analysis of owning and renting a vacation property that met certain criteria. The clients’ criteria were as follows: 1) The property must be less than 8 hours away from their home in Orlando, Florida. 2) The income from renting the property should exceed 50% of the cost of ownership. 3) The client will use the property four weeks out of the year, leaving 48 weeks to rent it to guests. 4) The property must be within biking distance of a beach with swimming or snorkeling. 5) The property must be less than 20 minutes away by car from a business district with restaurants and other services. In addition to the criteria given by the client, we had the following information about their financial resources: The two sisters were earning a combined gross $200,000 per year. They had been saving 15% of their post-tax income for two years for a down payment.

## Background:
As is the case with most real estate investment decisions, this was a challenging analysis not simply because of the number of variables but because of how real estate market and property ownership costs are always fluctuating. It is not unusual for a client to have a list of criteria like the one Amy and Addy gave to us. Every client, every market, and every point in time presents a unique set of questions that must be answered to deliver a thorough analysis of the opportunity and assess the feasibility of the investment. Short-term property rental has become more accessible to a wider percentage of the population since the emergence of AirBnB and other similar services. This trend has lead more people to wonder if it would be worthwhile to become a landlord. We are not aware of any centralized tools that allow potential real estate investors to input their list of real-world criteria and output a feasibility analysis so we decided to customize a solution for our clients Amy and Addy. 

## Technical Details:
Zillow and Google My Maps were used for real estate market research and market selection. Excel was used for a variety of tasks from data wrangling, preparation, analysis, to early-stage visualization. Clients were provided with an Excel tool for calculating property investment and maintenance costs with variable inputs. That workbook is provided in this repository with the name `Lauderdale_by_the_sea_rev_exp_calculations`. PowerBI was used for creation of two additional client-friendly dashboards; one for real estate market price analysis and another for analysis of AirBnB occupancy rate by property type and season in Lauderdale By The Sea, Florida. PowerBI was also used for data visualizations in the client presentation materials. Photoshop and Powerpoint were used to compile and present our analysis. Primary data sources include Zillow and insideairbnb.com.

## Implementation:
As our team did not have access to the Multiple Listing Service, we needed a creative solution to select and assess an appropriate market for our analysis. We knew that housing market price data would at least be manually accessible through platforms like Zillow and Realtor.com but we knew that finding data specific to short term rental usage would be a challenge. We knew short term rental through a platform like AirBnB would be the best option for our clients to generate revenue because of their desire to spend four weeks out of each year at the property while maintaining flexibility to schedule that visit at any point in the year. We were able to find robust data on short term rental activity from insideairbnb.com for Broward County, Florida, but Zillow’s active listing and recently sold data was only available for select markets in Florida. Faced with a decision about ideal market selection and real estate price versus insight as to short term rental activity we chose to focus on a market that met the client requirements that provided us with as much insight as possible into AirBnB listing activity. The justification was that our market pricing data could be refined later with academic access to Zillow’s data or obtained through other means, but that the AirBnB insights would be hard to derive from other sources. Noticing that Lauderdale By The Sea, a neighborhood within the city of Fort Lauderdale, met the client requirements and gave us a significant number of listings we decided to focus our analysis on that market. To arrive at an estimate of property price we started by examining the neighboring market of Miami. We used smoothing to reduce the luxury effect we knew to be intrinsic to that market when compared to Fort Lauderdale or Lauderdale By The sea. Ultimately, we manually researched active and recently sold listings in Lauderdale By The Sea and found the intersection of median price and square footage to arrive at our understanding of what a two-bedroom condo or home might cost in that market. We limited our search to two-bedroom homes and condos because we did not assume the sisters wanted to make do with less space than they needed or reach for a higher tier of the market by investing in more space than they needed for their personal use. We did not include analysis of property types similar to homes or condos (like townhomes or cottages) because of scarcity of data for those property types. Beyond property purchase price, ownership and maintenance costs were researched from a variety of online sources; most of which were specific to Lauderdale By The Sea or similar Florida markets. 
To estimate projected income we needed an understanding of nightly rental price for the two property types under consideration as well as the occupancy rate. We had access to price and occupancy rates by property type and number of bedrooms for March, June, and September of 2023 within the AirBnB dataset covering Lauderdale By The Sea. The December of 2023 dataset was missing values for number of bedrooms as well as information about amenities. We calculated median nightly rental price for each property type in each month, and average occupancy rate for the same conditions. Noticing a negative trend in both price and occupancy March through September we felt the need to come up with estimates for December to get a picture for the market throughout a whole year. We didn’t know when our clients wanted to visit their property but we suspected seasonality would have a significant impact on price and would be an important factor in their decision of when to visit. To arrive at estimates on price and occupancy for December we calculated median price and average occupancy rate for all condos and all homes for each accessible month in 2023 (March, June, September, December). We observed the trends were similar to what we had seen in our previous calculations and indicated a significant increase in demand in December. We noted the percentage increase from March to December as well as from September to December in both median price and average occupancy. We applied those percentage increases to our two-bedroom figures resulting in two estimated prices for each property type and two estimated occupancy rates for each property type in December. We averaged each of the two estimates together to arrive at our final estimated median price and average occupancy rate for two-bedroom condos and two-bedroom homes in Lauderdale By The Sea in December 2023. To arrive at our projected annual income by property type we multiplied the following values together: the average of the median prices throughout the year, the average of the average occupancy rates throughout the year, 336 days of the year the sisters would not be using the property themselves. Projecting revenue this way allowed us to stay ‘client visit timing agnostic’ although it lacked the specificity of seasonal price and occupancy dynamics. Most of my contributions to the project focused on this work and are documented here in `all_excel_documentation_airbnb`.
We provided additional analysis to the client regarding the relationship between amenities and occupancy. This was a complicated task as amenities are entered by AirBnB hosts and prone to typos, various spellings for the same amenity, and ‘amenity cramming’ leading to listings with as many as 68 amenities. To determine if there was a relationship between the number of amenities and occupancy of a given listing we broke the listings into three categories: listings with high occupancy (>60%), medium occupancy (33% to 60%), and low occupancy (<=33%). We then calculated the average number of amenities for each of these groups. Putting our amenity groups on the x axis and occupancy on the y axis we observed a negative relationship between number of amenities and occupancy rate. The recommendation to the client was not to focus on flooding their listing with amenities but to limit the amenities and only focus on providing those that fall into the list of most frequently occurring amenities. We provided that list of amenities to the client. 

## Results:
We were able to recommend Lauderdale By The Sea as a viable target market for our clients’ vacation rental investment property venture. Our estimated purchase price of a two-bedroom condo was $455,000 and the price for a two-bedroom home was $445,500. Maintenance and other expenses totaled $9,415 and $11,736 respectively. Accounting for financing, total annual expenses were estimated to be $58,290 for a condo and $59,648 for a home. Based on our projected revenue calculations, we expect a two-bedroom condo to generate $31,927 per year while a two-bedroom house should generate $41,613 per year. While both options exceed the clients’ requirement of paying for more than half of the price of the investment, we expect a home to cover 69.8% of its investment whereas a condo would only cover 54.8% of its annual investment.

## Conclusion:
Our clients should be able to conduct their property search in the Lauderdale By The Sea market with confidence as they are armed with a wealth of analysis and tools designed to help them in their decision making process. If they wanted to explore alternative markets they could apply our methodology to a similar market without much difficulty. If they decide they like Lauderdale By the Sea, the market would support their investment in a two-bedroom condominium or house while satisfying their initial criteria. 

## References:
[Forbes article](forbes 2020 the-airbnb-effect-on-housing-and-rent)
[insideairbnb.com](insideairbnb.com/get-the-data/)
